>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, JULY 18: A FIFTH
VICTIM DIES AFTER THE SHOOTING
AT A CHATTANOOGA MILITARY
RESERVE CENTER-- THE LATEST ON
THE INVESTIGATION; TENS OF
THOUSANDS OF RAPE KITS GOING
UNTESTED IN THE UNITED STATES;
AND HOW PREVENTING MONEY FROM
REACHING THE AL SHABAAB TERROR
GROUP MAY ALSO PREVENT SOMALIS
IN THE UNITED STATES FROM
SENDING MONEY TO RELATIVES BACK
HOME.
>> ANY FUNDS TRANSFER CAN BE
EXPLOITED BY BAD ACTORS,
INCLUDING TERRORIST GROUPS.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS IN
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
AND THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THE MASS SHOOTING IN
CHATTANOOGA, TENNESSEE, HAS
CLAIMED THE LIFE OF A FIFTH
VICTIM.
RANDALL SMITH, A 26-YEAR-OLD
NAVY PETTY OFFICER, DIED THIS
MORNING, TWO DAYS AFTER BEING
SHOT AT A FENCED-IN NAVY AND
MARINE RESERVE CENTER.
SMITH WAS MARRIED WITH THREE
DAUGHTERS.
FOUR UNARMED MARINES DIED
THURSDAY AT THE RESERVE CENTER
WHEN GUNMAN MUHAMMAD YOUSSEF
ABDULAZEEZ OPENED FIRE WITH
MULTIPLE WEAPONS.
POLICE KILLED THE 24-YEAR-OLD
ABDULAZEEZ AT THE SCENE.
ABDULAZEEZ WAS A NATURALIZED
AMERICAN CITIZEN FROM KUWAIT WHO
GREW UP IN TENNESSEE.
HE SPENT SEVEN MONTHS IN JORDAN
LAST YEAR.
REUTERS IS REPORTING A FRIEND OF
ABDULAZEEZ SAYS THE GUNMAN
RETURNED FROM JORDAN "CONCERNED"
OVER THE SITUATION IN THE MIDDLE
EAST AND THAT SHORTLY BEFORE THE
ATTACK, HE TEXTED HIM AN ISLAMIC
VERSE:
"WHOSOEVER SHOWS ENMITY TO A
FRIEND OF MINE, THEN I HAVE
DECLARED WAR AGAINST HIM."
INVESTIGATORS HAVE NOT OFFERED
ANY EVIDENCE THAT ABDULAZEEZ
MIGHT BE CONNECTED TO ANY
ISLAMIC EXTREMIST GROUP LIKE
ISIS.
SAUDI ARABIA ANNOUNCED TODAY IT
HAS THWARTED ISIS FROM CARRYING
OUT SEVERAL ATTACKS BY ARRESTING
431 PEOPLE IN THE PAST FEW
WEEKS.
THE SAUDI GOVERNMENT SAYS SOME
SUSPECTS PLANNED TO BOMB MOSQUES
IN THE SAUDI KINGDOM, AS WELL AS
DIPLOMATIC AND SECURITY
FACILITIES, WHILE OTHER SUSPECTS
WERE RECRUITING MILITANTS
THROUGH SOCIAL MEDIA.
THE GOVERNMENT SAID IT ALSO
ARRESTED SUSPECTS WHO CARRIED
OUT SEVERAL ATTACKS, INCLUDING A
SUICIDE BOMBING IN MAY THAT
KILLED 22 PEOPLE.
AND THERE ARE NEW REPORTS THAT
ISIS MAY HAVE USED CHEMICAL
WEAPONS TO ATTACK KURDISH
FIGHTERS IN IRAQ AND SYRIA.
FIELD INVESTIGATORS AND KURDISH
OFFICIALS SAY ISIS LAUNCHED
SHELLS LOADED WITH TOXIC
INDUSTRIAL OR AGRICULTURAL
CHEMICALS SEVERAL TIMES IN
RECENT WEEKS.
KURDISH FORCES ACCUSED ISIS OF
USING A CHLORINE-BASED CHEMICAL
IN AT LEAST ONE SUICIDE TRUCK
BOMBING EARLIER THIS YEAR, BUT
FIRING CHEMICAL MORTAR SHELLS
FROM A DISTANCE WOULD BE A NEW
TACTIC FOR THE EXTREMISTS.
IN IRAN, SUPREME LEADER
AYATOLLAH ALI KHAMENEI IS
VOICING HIS SUPPORT FOR HIS
COUNTRY'S NUCLEAR DEAL WITH U.S.
AND OTHER WORLD POWERS, BUT
KHAMENEI SAYS THAT DOES NOT
SIGNAL AN END TO HOSTILITIES
WITH THE U.S. OR ISRAEL.
>> (translated): WHETHER THE
DEAL IS APPROVED OR DISAPPROVED,
WE WILL NEVER STOP SUPPORTING
OUR FRIENDS IN THE REGION AND
THE PEOPLE OF PALESTINE, YEMEN,
SYRIA, IRAQ, BAHRAIN AND
LEBANON.
EVEN AFTER THIS DEAL, OUR POLICY
TOWARDS THE ARROGANT U.S. WILL
NOT CHANGE.
>> Sreenivasan: IN HIS FIRST
PUBLIC SPEECH SINCE THE DEAL,
KHAMENEI CALLED AMERICA
"AGGRESSIVE AND ATROCIOUS" AND
TOLD HIS AUDIENCE IRAN DID NOT
NEED TO BE STOPPED FROM
DEVELOPING A NUCLEAR WEAPON
SINCE SUCH A WEAPON WOULD
SUPPOSEDLY BE FORBIDDEN UNDER
ISLAMIC LAW.
THE KU KLUX KLAN AND AN AFRICAN-
AMERICAN GROUP HELD OPPOSING
RALLIES TODAY AT THE SOUTH
CAROLINA STATE HOUSE.
BOTH SIDES ARE DEMONSTRATING
OVER THE STATE'S DECISION TO
REMOVE THE CONFEDERATE BATTLE
FLAG LAST WEEK.
THE K.K.K. SAYS REMOVING THE
FLAG IS THE GOVERNMENT'S ATTEMPT
TO "ERASE WHITE CULTURE" FROM
HISTORY.
THE GROUP "BLACK EDUCATORS FOR
JUSTICE" WERE PROTESTING FOR A
DIFFERENT REASON, SAYING THE
FLAG'S REMOVAL IS AN "ILLUSION
OF PROGRESS" IN RACE RELATIONS.
>> Sreenivasan: WHEN A WOMAN
REPORTS A RAPE SOON AFTER IT
OCCURS, AUTHORITIES ARE ABLE TO
GET A RAPE KIT, PHYSICAL
EVIDENCE EXTRACTED FROM THE
VICTIM'S BODY WHICH MAY CONTAIN
THE VALUABLE D.N.A. OF THE
PERPETRATOR.
BUT WHAT HAPPENS AFTERWARD?
THERE HAVE BEEN STORIES OVER THE
YEARS OF CITIES LIKE NEW YORK,
LOS ANGELES AND DETROIT FACING
MASSIVE BACKLOGS OF UNTESTED
RAPE KITS, BUT THIS WEEK WE
LEARNED THIS IS A MUCH BIGGER
PROBLEM AROUND THE COUNTRY.
A NEW INVESTIGATION BY THE
"U.S.A. TODAY" MEDIA NETWORK
FINDS AT LEAST 70,000 RAPE KITS
REMAIN UNTESTED IN MORE THAN
1,000 DIFFERENT POLICE
DEPARTMENTS.
KEEP IN MIND THERE ARE MORE THAN
18,000 DIFFERENT POLICE
DEPARTMENTS AROUND THE COUNTRY.
POLICE DEPARTMENTS IN 34 STATES
HAVE NEVER EVEN TAKEN AN
INVENTORY OF THE EVIDENCE STILL
SITTING ON THE SHELVES UNTESTED,
AND POLICE IN 44 STATES HAVE NO
GUIDELINES OF WHEN TO TEST RAPE
KITS.
THERE ARE SEVERAL REASONS WHY,
AND TO HELP US UNDERSTAND IS
REPORTER STEVE REILLY FROM
"U.S.A. TODAY."
SO, IT'S NOT JUST ONE NEWSPAPER.
TELL US ABOUT HOW YOU PULLED OFF
THIS LARGE-SCALE INVESTIGATION.
>> EXACTLY.
WELL WE SURVEYED LAW ENFORCEMENT
AGENCIES AS YOU SAID ACROSS THE
COUNTRY AND FOUND FIGURES AT
MORE THAN A THOUSAND LAW
ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES WHERE WE
IDENTIFIED UNTESTED SEXUAL
ASSAULT KITS.
EACH OF OUR BROADCAST AND
CURRENT PARTNERS INVESTIGATED
THE ISSUE IN THEIR OWN
COMMUNITIES AND WE LOOKED AT THE
SCOPE AND BREADTH OF THIS ISSUE
ACROSS THE COUNTRY.
>> Sreenivasan: AREN'T ALL THESE
ENTERED INTO A STATE OR
NATIONAL DATABASE SO YOU CAN
FIND, SAY, SERIAL RAPISTS ACROSS
STATE LINES?
>> EXACTLY.
THAT'S WHAT MANY ADVOCATES ARE
MAKING THE POINT ABOUT THESE
DAYS IS THE USEFULNESS OF STATE
AND FEDERAL D.N.A. DATABASES HAS
GROWN DRASTICALLY OVER JUST
ABOUT SEVERAL DECADES.
AND THIS EVIDENCE IS MUCH MORE
VALUABLE AND MUCH MORE ABLE TO
HELP LAW ENFORCEMENT IDENTIFY
SUSPECTS THAN IT EVER HAS BEEN.
>> Sreenivasan: AND IT'S
IMPORTANT TO REMEMBER THAT EVEN
BEHIND THIS 70,000 NUMBER,
THERE'S A STORY, THERE'S A
PERSON BEHIND EACH ONE OF THEM.
THIS ISN'T EVEN THE COMPLETE
NUMBER, IT COULD BE MUCH BIGGER
THAN THIS.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
LIKE YOU SAID, WE OBTAINED DATA
FOR ABOUT A THOUSAND LAW
ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES, AND THAT'S
A SMALL PORTION OF THE NATION'S
18,000 LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES.
NO GOVERNMENT ENTITY HAS GONE
AND COMPREHENSIVELY LOOKED AT
THAT.
BUT LIKE YOU SAID, BEHIND THE
FIGURES, EACH KIT IS SOMEONE'S
STORY AND, YOU KNOW, TESTING
INDIVIDUAL KITS, YOU KNOW, CAN
MEAN A LOT TO A SURVIVOR OF ONE
OF THESE INCIDENTS.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU DOCUMENT HOW
SOME OF THESE SURVIVORS, UNTIL
THIS TESTS WENT THROUGH, WAS IN
FEAR, NOT KNOWING WHETHER THEIR
PREDATOR WAS OUT THERE.
>> WHEN THESE KITS AREN'T
TESTED, SOMEONE HAS GONE THROUGH
THE TERRIBLE PROCESS OF HAVING
THESE KITS COLLECTED, AS THE
PROCESS CAN TAKE UP TO FOUR TO
SIX HOURS AFTER WE'VE COLLECTED
THIS EVIDENCE.
AND SO, IT'S A VERY SENSITIVE
PROCESS, AND IT CAN BE DIFFICULT
FOR SOME TO HEAR THAT THESE KITS
AREN'T BEING TESTED IN SOME
CASES, AND IT CAN MEAN... IT'S
TREMENDOUSLY MEANINGFUL TO HAVE
THESE CASES RESOLVED.
>> Sreenivasan: ONE OF THE
THINGS THE POLICE DEPARTMENTS
ARE OFTEN LIKELY TO SAY IS,
"HEY, DO YOU KNOW WHAT, AS
MUCH AS I'D LIKE TO HAVE EVERY
ONE OF THESE TESTED, IT'S A
THOUSAND BUCKS A POP AND I DON'T
HAVE THE FUNDS."
BUT YOUR REPORTING POINTS OUT
THAT THERE HAVE BEEN FUNDS
ALLOCATED FOR THIS, THEY'RE JUST
NOT GETTING OUT THERE.
>> EXACTLY.
THE FUNDING HAS BEEN THERE.
IT'S MORE A MATTER OF REALLY
POLICY MAKERS AND LEADERS AT THE
LOCAL AND STATE LEVEL TAKING
INITIATIVES AND PURSUING FIRST
AUDITS OF THE NUMBER OF SEXUAL
ASSAULT KITS THEY DO HAVE IN
EVIDENCE THAT HAVEN'T BEEN
TESTED.
AND THEN, SECOND, REVIEWING AND
TESTING THOSE THAT SHOULD BE
TESTED.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT.
STEVE REILLY OF THE "U.S.A.
TODAY," SPEAKING TO MORE THAN 90
PAPERS THAT LAUNCHED THIS
INVESTIGATION.
THANKS SO MUCH FOR YOUR TIME.
>> THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR TWO DECADES,
SOMALIA HAS BEEN IMMERSED IN
CIVIL STRIFE.
A NEW FEDERAL GOVERNMENT THERE
HAS HELPED THE EAST AFRICAN
NATION REGAIN SOME STABILITY IN
THE PAST FEW YEARS, BUT SOMALIA
STILL LACKS A FUNCTIONAL BANKING
SYSTEM.
INSTEAD, THE COUNTRY RELIES ON
AS MUCH AS $2 BILLION IN MONEY
TRANSFERS FROM ABROAD EVERY YEAR
TO KEEP ITS ECONOMY GOING.
A BIG PORTION OF THAT MONEY
COMES FROM SOMALI IMMIGRANTS IN
THE UNITED STATES.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
THE NEWSHOUR'S STEPHEN FEE
REPORTS ON HOW STRICT ANTI-
TERRORISM REGULATIONS COULD TURN
THAT MONEY FLOW TO A TRICKLE.
>> Reporter: BEHIND THIS ROW OF
UNASSUMING STOREFRONTS ON
MINNEAPOLIS' EAST 24th STREET
LIES A LITTLE SLICE OF SOMALIA.
DOZENS OF SHOPS SELL SCARVES AND
BOOKS, FRIED SNACKS AND SWEET
SOMALI TEA-- PRETTY MUCH
EVERYTHING YOU CAN BUY IN
MOGADISHU, BUT IN THE HEART OF
MINNESOTA.
MARYAN ABDI MOVED HERE FROM
SOMALIA 17 YEARS AGO AND RUNS
ONE OF THOSE SHOPS.
"I SELL RUGS AND FLOWERS," SHE
SAYS, AND IT'S NOT JUST TO
SUPPORT HER FAMILY IN THE U.S.
WHO DO YOU SEND MONEY TO AT
HOME?
WHO IS STILL IN SOMALIA IN YOUR
FAMILY?
"MY BROTHERS, UNCLES AND AUNTS,"
SHE SAYS.
EACH MONTH, SHE SENDS ANYWHERE
FROM $300 TO $500 TO FAMILY AND
FRIENDS BACK HOME.
SO, THIS SHOP BASICALLY HELPS
SUPPORT NOT JUST YOUR FAMILY,
BUT YOUR FAMILY, THEIR
NEIGHBORS, THEIR FRIENDS.
I MEAN, ALL FROM HERE,
BASICALLY.
"YES," SHE SAYS, "THE WHOLE
FAMILY.
I HAVE THIS BUSINESS, AND I HAVE
TO HELP THEM."
MARYAN ABDI IS ONE OF 85,000
SOMALI-AMERICANS IN THE U.S.,
ROUGHLY A THIRD OF WHOM LIVE IN
MINNESOTA.
THE MAJORITY FLED EAST AFRICA
AFTER SOMALIA'S CIVIL WAR IN THE
1990s.
ACCORDING TO COMMUNITY LEADERS
IN MINNEAPOLIS-ST. PAUL, 80% OF
THE SOMALI-AMERICANS HERE SEND
MONEY BACK TO EAST AFRICA.
AID GROUPS SAY 40% OF SOMALIA'S
POPULATION RELIES ON THOSE
DOLLARS-- KNOWN AS REMITTANCES--
TO SURVIVE.
MOHAMED IDRIS RUNS ARAHA, THE
AMERICAN RELIEF AGENCY FOR THE
HORN OF AFRICA, BASED IN
MINNEAPOLIS.
>> IT IS ESTIMATED ABOUT $1.3
BILLION ARE THE... THE AMOUNT OF
MONEY THAT COME ON AN ANNUAL
BASIS TO SOMALIA FROM SOMALIS IN
DIASPORA.
SO, THE REMITTANCE IS THE
LIFELINE, IS THE BACKBONE FOR
SOMALIA.
>> Reporter: BUT NOW, THE $215
MILLION THAT FLOW FROM THE
SOMALI DIASPORA IN THE U.S. EACH
YEAR MAY BE IN JEOPARDY.
THE U.S. GOVERNMENT IS
INCREASINGLY CONCERNED SOME OF
THOSE REMITTANCES ARE GOING TO
TERROR GROUPS THAT HAVE TAKEN
HOLD IN MUSLIM-MAJORITY SOMALIA,
PARTICULARLY AL SHABAAB, AN
AL QAEDA-LINKED ORGANIZATION
BEHIND AN ASSAULT ON A KENYAN
UNIVERSITY THIS APRIL THAT
KILLED MORE THAN 140 PEOPLE AND
AN ATTACK ON A KENYAN MALL TWO
YEARS AGO THAT KILLED 67.
ADAM SZUBIN IS THE U.S. TREASURY
DEPARTMENT'S ACTING UNDER
SECRETARY FOR TERRORISM AND
FINANCIAL INTELLIGENCE.
>> ANY TIME YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT
FUNDS TRANSFER MECHANISMS--
WHETHER IT'S WIRES, WHETHER
IT'S THE BAKING SYSTEM-- ANY
FUNDS TRANSFER CAN BE EXPLOITED
BY BAD ACTORS, INCLUDING
TERRORIST GROUPS.
AND OBVIOUSLY, WHEN YOU'RE
TALKING ABOUT SOMALIA, AL
SHABAAB HAS A PRESENCE THERE,
AND IT'S HAD A VERY HARMFUL
INFLUENCE ON THE PEOPLE OF
SOMALIA.
>> Reporter: AS A RESULT,
TREASURY HAS IMPOSED STRICTER
CONTROLS ON MONEY TRANSFERS TO
SOMALIA, WHERE THERE'S A WEAK
CENTRAL BANK AND LIMITED
FINANCIAL OVERSIGHT.
>> ANY TIME YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT
FUNDS TRANSFER MECHANISMS--
WHETHER IT'S WIRES, WHETHER
IT'S THE BAKING SYSTEM-- ANY
FUNDS TRANSFER CAN BE EXPLOITED
BY BAD ACTORS, INCLUDING
TERRORIST GROUPS.
AND OBVIOUSLY, WHEN YOU'RE
TALKING ABOUT SOMALIA, AL
SHABAAB HAS A PRESENCE THERE.
>> Reporter: BUT, ACCORDING TO
RYAN ALLEN, AN ASSOCIATE
PROFESSOR AT THE UNIVERSITY OF
MINNESOTA'S HUMPHREY SCHOOL OF
PUBLIC AFFAIRS, TREASURY'S
STRICT ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING
RULES ARE HAVING THE INADVERTENT
EFFECT OF PRESSURING BANKS THAT
NORMALLY HELP FACILITATE
REMITTANCES TO SOMALIA.
>> BECAUSE OF THE EXPECTATIONS
ON THE DUE DILIGENCE, THE BANKS
RUN A RISK.
IF THE MONEY SHOULD FALL INTO
THE WRONG HANDS, DESPITE THEIR
BEST EFFORTS EVEN, THEY CAN FACE
SOME REALLY SIGNIFICANT
PENALTIES, YOU KNOW, IN THE
MILLIONS OF DOLLARS KINDS OF
PENALTIES.
>> Reporter: WITH THAT IN MIND,
THESE INTERMEDIARY BANKS THAT
HOLD THE ACCOUNTS FOR THESE
MONEY TRANSFER ORGANIZATIONS
STARTED CLOSING SOME OF THESE
ACCOUNTS?
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
SO, SLOWLY, ONE BY ONE, AND
THEN... AND THEN A KIND OF RASH
OF CLOSINGS, MANY OF THE... MANY
OF THE BANKS ARE DECIDING THAT
THE RISK IS NOT WORTH THE
RETURN.
>> Reporter: MONEY TRANSFERS TO
SOMALIA ARE COMPLEX.
SENDERS, SAY, IN MINNEAPOLIS
BRING CASH TO A MONEY TRANSFER
WINDOW.
THE MONEY IS THEN HELD IN AN
INTERMEDIARY BANK, WIRED THROUGH
A CLEARINGHOUSE IN THE MIDDLE
EAST AND FINALLY WINDS UP IN
EAST AFRICA.
BUT IF THE MONEY ENDS UP IN THE
WRONG HANDS, THE INTERMEDIARY
BANKS MAY HE HELD RESPONSIBLE.
THIS FEBRUARY, ONE OF THOSE
INSTITUTIONS-- MERCHANTS BANK OF
CALIFORNIA, RESPONSIBLE FOR UP
TO 80% OF U.S.-TO-SOMALIA
REMITTANCES-- DECIDED TO GET OUT
OF THE BUSINESS.
>> RIGHT NOW, FOR REGULAR
SOMALIS IN THE TWIN CITIES, THE
NUMBER OF REMITTANCE... SOMALI
REMITTANCES THAT ARE DOING THIS
BUSINESS ARE SHRINKING.
>> Reporter: MOHAMED IDRIS,
WHOSE GROUP HAS OFFICES
THROUGHOUT EAST AFRICA, IS STILL
ABLE TO SEND MONEY TO HIS
COLLEAGUES IN SOMALIA, BUT THE
REMITTANCE FIRMS IN MINNEAPOLIS
ARE CAPPING AMOUNTS HE CAN SEND
ABROAD AND CHARGING HIGHER FEES.
>> REMEMBER, THERE IS NO
TRADITIONAL BANK IN SOMALIA.
AND... AND THAT'S... EVEN THE
U.N. USES THESE WIRE TRANSFERS
BECAUSE THAT'S THE... IT'S THE
ONLY MEANS TO SEND MONEY TO
SOMALIA.
BUSINESSES, CHARITIES,
GOVERNMENT.
>> Reporter: BUT SOME OF THOSE
DOLLARS HAVE MADE THEIR WAY FROM
THE U.S. TO MILITANT GROUPS IN
SOMALIA.
IN 2011, TWO SOMALI-AMERICAN
WOMEN FROM ROCHESTER, MINNESOTA,
WERE CONVICTED OF SENDING $8,600
TO AL SHABAAB.
THAT SAME YEAR, A SOMALI CAB
DRIVER IN ST. LOUIS PLEADED
GUILTY TO PROVIDING $6,000 TO
HELP AL SHABAAB BUY A VEHICLE.
AND IN 2013, A JURY IN SAN DIEGO
FOUND FOUR SOMALI MEN GUILTY OF
CONSPIRING TO RAISE FUNDS FOR
THE TERROR GROUP.
>> SO FAR, THE U.S. GOVERNMENT
HAS ONLY BEEN ABLE TO FIND SOME
ISOLATED CASES OF THIS, RIGHT.
AND SO, HOW MUCH MORE WIDESPREAD
IT MIGHT BE IS REALLY HARD TO
DETERMINE.
>> Reporter: ACTING TREASURY
UNDERSECRETARY ADAM SZUBIN WON'T
SAY EXACTLY HOW MUCH MONEY HE
BELIEVES HAS MADE ITS WAY FROM
THE U.S. TO AL SHABAAB, BUT HIS
CONCERN LIES WITH THE LACK OF
ANY FORMAL BANKING
INFRASTRUCTURE ON THE SOMALI
SIDE OF REMITTANCE TRANSACTIONS.
>> AND SO, WHAT WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT IS A VERY OPAQUE-- IF YOU
WILL, A BLACK HOLE-- WHERE
THOSE FUNDS ARE GOING.
THAT'S THE ROOT CONCERN OF BANKS
WHO ARE ASKING HARD QUESTIONS
ABOUT "HOW DO WE KNOW THE FUNDS
ARE GOING WHERE THEY'RE SUPPOSED
TO BE GOING?"
>> Reporter: MONEY TRANSFER
OFFICES IN THE U.S. CAN CHECK
THE NAMES OF MONEY SENDERS AND
RECIPIENTS AGAINST A GOVERNMENT
LIST OF KNOWN TERRORIST
SUPPORTERS, BUT THEIR
COUNTERPARTS IN EAST AFRICA HAVE
NO SUCH ABILITY.
ABDULAZIZ SUGULE RUNS A TRADE
GROUP FOR MONEY TRANSFER OFFICES
IN MINNESOTA.
HOW DO YOU KNOW THAT SOME OF
THIS MONEY MIGHT NOT EVENTUALLY
GET INTO THE WRONG HANDS?
>> THEY KNOW THEIR CUSTOMERS.
THEY KNOW PEOPLE WHO SEND MONEY.
IF THEY SEE SOMETHING'S
HAPPENING, THEY CAN ALSO...
THERE'S A WAY YOU CAN REPORT
TO THE GOVERNMENT.
>> Reporter: SUGULE SAYS LACK OF
TRANSPARENCY IS AN ISSUE, BUT
THE RISK IS NEGLIGIBLE.
>> IF YOU LOOK AT THE AVERAGE
PERSON SENDING, IF YOU LOOK AT
THAT, IT'S GOING TO BE $200,
LESS THAN $200.
AND THAT MONEY'S GOING TO THE
NEEDY PEOPLE, THE PEOPLE IN
REFUGEE CAMPS, THE PEOPLE WHO
ARE DESTITUTE.
>> Reporter: AND SOMALI-
AMERICANS LIKE 24-YEAR-OLD TRUCK
DRIVER ABDI SALAD SAY THEY'RE AS
CONCERNED AS THE U.S. GOVERNMENT
ABOUT MILITANT GROUPS BACK HOME.
AFTER ALL, THEIR FAMILIES ARE IN
DANGER.
>> WE'RE NOT TERRORISTS.
WE'RE NOT SUPPORTING TERRORISTS.
WE JUST WANT TO SEND MONEY TO
OUR FAMILIES.
>> Reporter: MINNEAPOLIS MAYOR
BETSY HODGES HAS TEAMED UP WITH
HER STATE'S CONGRESSIONAL
DELEGATION TO PRESS FOR A
NATIONAL SOLUTION, ONE THAT
BALANCES SECURITY CONCERNS WITH
HER CONSTITUENTS' DESIRES TO
AID THEIR FAMILIES.
>> IT'S A QUESTION OF BANKS,
FEDERAL REGULATORS, THE STATE
DEPARTMENT, TREASURY WORKING
TOGETHER TO FIND SOLUTIONS THAT
WILL BOTH KEEP OUR COUNTRY
SECURE AND KEEP THE WORLD SECURE
AS WE SHOULD AND AS WE MUST, BUT
THAT WOULD ALSO ALLOW FOLKS TO
SEND DOLLARS BACK HOME.
AND FRANKLY, NOT BEING ABLE TO
SEND DOLLARS BACK HOME, IN SOME
WAYS, IS A LARGER SECURITY
ISSUE.
IT GIVES A REASON FOR PEOPLE TO
SAY "AT ONE POINT YOU HAD ACCESS
TO RESOURCES FROM HOME, NOW YOU
DON'T; THE WEST DOESN'T CARE
ABOUT YOU."
WHICH, YOU KNOW, WE DON'T NEED
TO ADD TO THAT PILE OF MESSAGES.
>> Reporter: IN WASHINGTON,
MINNESOTA CONGRESSMAN KEITH
ELLISON HAS TAKEN UP HIS
CONSTITUENTS' CONCERNS, AS WELL.
HE'S PROPOSED REDUCING THE
LIABILITY FOR BANKS THAT
FACILITATE REMITTANCES SO IF
MONEY GOES TO THE WRONG PEOPLE,
THE BANKS WOULD FACE LESS SEVERE
PUNISHMENT FROM REGULATORS.
COULDN'T THAT HELP AT LEAST
LOOSEN UP THE GEARS A LITTLE
BIT?
>> I DON'T THINK THAT'S THE
ANSWER IN THAT IT'S NOT A
QUESTION OF REGULATORY
LIABILITY.
BANKS DON'T WANT TO BE HANDLING
MONEY FLOWS IF THEY DON'T KNOW
WHERE THEY'RE GOING, ESPECIALLY
INTO A HIGH-RISK AREA LIKE
SOMALIA.
AND WE CAN'T BE IN THE PRACTICE
OF SAYING "YOU DON'T HAVE TO
WORRY ABOUT YOUR ANTI-MONEY
LAUNDERING OR COUNTER-TERRORIST
FINANCING REGULATORY
OBLIGATIONS."
>> Reporter: THE TREASURY
DEPARTMENT AND OTHER U.S.
AGENCIES ARE WORKING TO
STRENGTHEN BANKING OVERSIGHT IN
SOMALIA.
UNIVERSITY OF MINNESOTA
PROFESSOR RYAN ALLEN SAYS THAT
COULD REDUCE THE RISK OF MONEY
ENDING UP IN TERRORISTS' HANDS
AND HELP KEEP THE REMITTANCE
PATHWAY OPEN.
>> IF WE HAVE A WELL-ESTABLISHED
AND STRONG CENTRAL BANK IN
SOMALIA, IF WE HAVE A BANKING
SECTOR THAT IS CAPABLE OF DOING
ASSURANCES ON WHO'S GETTING
MONEY AND KEEPING TABS ON WHERE
THE MONEY'S GOING, THAT'S THE
BEST LONG-TERM SOLUTION TO THIS
PROBLEM.
>> Reporter: BUT IT'S THE SHORT
TERM THAT HAS SOMALI-AMERICANS
IN MINNEAPOLIS MOST CONCERNED.
AND MOHAMED IDRIS, WHO RUNS THE
RELIEF AGENCY ARAHA, SAYS
SLOWING THE REMITTANCE FLOW
COULD SABOTAGE SOMALIA'S GRADUAL
STEPS TOWARD GREATER POLITICAL
STABILITY.
>> IT MEANS THAT OUR WORK WILL
BE DOUBLED.
IT WILL BE... MEANS THAT THE
FRAGILE SITUATION THAT IS
GETTING BETTER RIGHT NOW IN
SOMALIA IS GOING TO REVERSE.
>> Sreenivasan: READ THE
PERSONAL STORIES OF SOMALI
IMMIGRANTS TRYING TO SEND MONEY
BACK HOME TO THEIR FAMILIES.
VISIT US ONLINE AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
TO THE MIDDLE EAST, WHERE
TENSIONS BETWEEN ARABS AND JEWS
ARE WELL-DOCUMENTED.
BUT THERE IS AN ONGOING EFFORT
TO CHANNEL SOME OF THAT TENSION
INTO A MORE PEACEFUL FORM OF
"FIGHTING."
NEWSHOUR'S MARTIN FLETCHER HAS
THE STORY OF USING MARTIAL ARTS
TO BRIDGE THE DIVIDE.
>> Reporter: A SEA OF WHITE.
KARATE TEACHERS FROM ALL OVER
ISRAEL, MEN AND WOMEN-- JEWS,
MUSLIMS, CHRISTIANS, DRUZE,
BEDOUIN-- TOGETHER FOR A KARATE
MASTER CLASS ON THE SHORES OF
THE MEDITERRANEAN, NORTH OF TEL
AVIV.
THE ATTRACTION:
>> EVERYBODY, YO!
>> Reporter: IMAD KHALIL, WHO
RUNS THE KARATE ASSOCIATION OF
NEIGHBORING JORDAN.
BUT THIS ISN'T ONLY ABOUT THE
MARTIAL ARTS; IT'S ABOUT
BRIDGING THE GAP BETWEEN JEWS
AND ARABS.
HOPING THAT THE JORDANIAN
TEACHER WILL INTRODUCE MORE
ISRAELIS TO JORDAN AND TO THE
ARAB WORLD.
A STEP TOWARD A WIDER PEACE.
>> IT'S HELP FOR PEACE.
IF YOU HAVE A NEIGHBOR AND NEVER
YOU SEE HIM, AND THEY SEE YOU,
HOW YOU GOING TO HAVE RELATION
WITH HIM?
FRIENDSHIP?
>> Reporter: KHALIL'S FRIENDSHIP
VISIT TO ISRAEL GOT OFF TO A
ROCKY START, THOUGH.
THERE WERE SUPPOSED TO BE EIGHT
JORDANIANS HERE TAKING PART IN
THESE KARATE EXERCISES, BUT SIX
OF THEM WEREN'T ALLOWED INTO THE
COUNTRY OF ISRAEL, THEY COULDN'T
GET VISAS.
>> VERY DISAPPOINTING.
>> Reporter: DANNY HAKIM, THE
FOUNDER OF BUDO FOR PEACE, THE
NON-PROFIT GROUP THAT INVITED
THE JORDANIANS, CALLED IT JUST A
BUREAUCRATIC HICCUP.
>> YOU KNOW, AS A KARATE PERSON,
YOU KNOW, IT'S JUST ONE
OBSTACLE.
NEXT TIME, WE'LL DEFINITELY GET
THEM TO COME.
>> Reporter: BUDO FOR PEACE HAS
24 MARTIAL ARTS CLUBS IN ISRAEL
AND 60 MORE AFFILIATED CLUBS
THAT FOLLOW THE SAME CREED.
>> WE DO TWO THINGS.
ONE IS TEACH VALUES; VALUES LIKE
RESPECT, SELF-CONTROL, HARMONY
WITHIN YOURSELF, HARMONY FOR
OTHERS, SELF-DEVELOPMENT.
THE OTHER SIDE, WE BRING PEOPLE
AND COMMUNITIES TOGETHER.
THERE'S SO MANY DIFFERENT ETHNIC
GROUPS IN ISRAEL AND ALL OVER
THE WORLD, EVERY COUNTRY.
WE TRY AND BRING THEM TOGETHER.
>> Reporter: FOR ALL THE
VIOLENCE AND HOSTILITY BETWEEN
JEWS AND ARABS, THERE ARE
HUNDREDS OF ORGANIZATIONS
DEVOTED TO BRINGING THEM
TOGETHER, MANY THROUGH SPORTS.
IN ADDITION TO BUDO FOR PEACE
THERE IS SOCCER FOR PEACE,
BASKETBALL FOR PEACE, SURFING
FOR PEACE AND EVEN ULTIMATE
FRISBEE FOR PEACE.
EIGHT-YEAR-OLD IDAN NOIT HAS
BEEN LEARNING KARATE SINCE HE
WAS FIVE.
AND AS HIS MOTHER, INBAR,
WATCHES, SHE SAYS SHE DREAMS OF
PEACE AND THAT HER SON WON'T
NEED TO FIGHT IN THE ISRAELI
ARMY.
>> WE KEEP HOPING THAT UNTIL HE
BECOMES 18, HE WON'T HAVE TO GO,
BUT I'M NOT SO SURE.
>> Reporter: THAT'S BEEN EVERY
GENERATION'S DREAM HERE?
>> EXACTLY.
>> Reporter: KARATE ISN'T ONLY
ABOUT THE BODY, BUT THE MIND,
TOO.
AND IN JERUSALEM'S ALYN
HOSPITAL, THE KARATE COLLEAGUES
BROUGHT THEIR MESSAGE OF HOPE TO
CHILDREN WHO CAN REALLY USE IT.
>> THEY'RE NOT ABLE TO DO A FULL
PUNCH.
THEY JUST DO THIS.
BUT FOR THEM INSIDE, IT'S A HUGE
ACHIEVEMENT.
>> Reporter: KHALIL DOES SIMILAR
WORK IN JORDAN, BRINGING MARTIAL
ARTS TO CHILDREN WHO BENEFIT IN
THE BODY AND MAYBE THE MIND.
>> ALL THE PARENTS, ALL THE
PEOPLE WHO ARE IN CHARGE IN THE
HOSPITAL, THEY TOLD ME, "THE
CHILDREN ARE GETTING BETTER
PHYSICALLY AND MENTALLY."
WELL, I SAID, "OH, MAKE ME HAPPY
THIS."
>> Reporter: FIGHTING FOR PEACE,
FOR YOUNG AND OLD.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO
VIEWERS LIKE YOU, YOUR CHANCE TO
COMMENT ON OUR WORK.
WE RETURN TO LAST WEEK'S SEGMENT
ABOUT HARPER LEE'S NEW NOVEL,
"GO SET A WATCHMAN," AND THE
REVELATION THAT LEE'S BELOVED
CHARACTER FROM "TO KILL A
MOCKINGBIRD," ATTICUS FINCH,
HOLDS RACIST VIEWS.
>> ATTICUS FINCH IS REVEALED TO
BE A SEGREGATIONIST, SOMEONE WHO
JOINS AN ORGANIZATION TO RESIST
THE INTEGRATION MOVEMENT THAT
HAPPENED AFTER BROWN VERSUS
BOARD OF EDUCATION.
>> Sreenivasan: WRITERFROMTEXAS
SAID:
"IT WAS CLEAR IN 'TO KILL A
MOCKINGBIRD' THAT ATTICUS
DEFENDED HIS CLIENT BECAUSE THAT
IS HOW THE LAW IN THIS COUNTRY
IS SUPPOSED TO WORK.
KUDOS TO HIM FOR THAT.
THE BOOK HINTED THAT THIS WAS
DESPITE ATTICUS' BELIEFS.
WOULD THAT ALL PERSONS TODAY
RECEIVED ADEQUATE
REPRESENTATION."
CALIPENGUIN HOPED SCHOOLS WOULD
USE THE CHANGE IN ATTICUS
FINCH:
"WILL SCHOOL DISTRICTS BAN THAT
NOVEL NOW THAT ATTICUS TURNS OUT
TO BE A SEGREGATIONIST IN THE
SEQUEL?
I HOPE NOT.
TEACHERS SHOULD USE THIS
OPPORTUNITY TO DISCUSS THE
SPECTRUM OF CIVIL RIGHTS ISSUES
IN OUR NATION'S HISTORY."
PHOEBE GAVIN DEFENDED HARPER
LEE:
"I'M VERY ANNOYED BY THE
REACTIONS.
NO MATTER HOW INVESTED YOU ARE
IN A CHARACTER, YOU DON'T OWN
THEM-- THE AUTHOR DOES.
ONLY THE AUTHOR KNOWS WHO ANY
PARTICULAR CHARACTER TRULY IS."
MICHAEL McLELLAN ADDED:
"BOTH ARE FICTION, BOTH ARE
SEPARATE ENTITIES.
READING THIS NEW NOVEL SHOULD
HAVE NO EFFECT ON HOW YOU VIEW
'MOCKINGBIRD.'"
DAVID UFFER LAMENTED:
"ARE THERE TO BE NO HEROES LEFT
STANDING IN THIS CRAZED
TORMENTED WORLD!?"
KATHI DUGINSKI WANTED NO PART OF
THE NEW BOOK:
"IF THAT IS TRUE, I WON'T READ
IT.
I LOVE THE ATTICUS FINCH I HAVE
KNOWN SINCE I WAS A CHILD."
AND JOHN HERGT TOOK A MORE
CYNICAL APPROACH:
"IT'S SIMPLY AN INFERIOR EARLIER
EFFORT THAT WAS SCRAPPED AND NOW
RESURRECTED FOR MONEY."
AS ALWAYS, WE WELCOME YOUR
COMMENTS.
VISIT US AT
www.pbs.org/newshour, ON OUR
FACEBOOK PAGE, OR TWEET US AT
NEWSHOUR.
FINALLY TONIGHT, A NEW STUDY
PUBLISHED IN THE JOURNAL "NATURE
CLIMATE CHANGE" FINDS GLOBAL
WARMING IS CHANGING THE JET
STREAM OVER THE PACIFIC OCEAN,
ADDING A MINUTE PER ROUND TRIP
TO AIRLINE FLIGHT TIMES.
RESEARCHERS SAY THAT EXTRA
MINUTE, APPLIED TO EVERY
COMMERCIAL U.S. FLIGHT, COULD
COST 300,000 HOURS OF FLIGHT
TIME AND A BILLION GALLONS OF
JET FUEL PER YEAR.
THAT'S ALL FOR TONIGHT.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
SEE YOU BACK HERE TOMORROW.